Session 1
What Is Meditation Literature?

Welcome, everybody, here at the table. It's good to have you here. Welcome to those of you taking the class online. This class is called Reading the Bible as Meditation Literature. Why would I name a class that and think that that's an important thing to take a group of people through? Go with me on a thought experiment. Let's say we could get into a time-travel machine. I don't know. Picture it in your mind, whatever shape it is. And we could go back to Jerusalem pre-Jesus, like 250 B.C., something like that. And we could hang out with Moshe and Yermeyahu and Esther in the temple courts. And they are going over maybe to the pillared colonnade where Jesus, 200 years later or so, is going to tip over the tables. And so there's like this reading of the Torah that someone reads aloud like a Levite. And there's a Hebrew word for that. The verb is kara; the noun is mikra. And that means to call out loud. And that actually is the word used in the books of Ezra and Nehemiah for when the Levites get together in the temple courts and they read to the people. Which means, with kara, they call out. So it's interesting that we come across a word in our English Bibles, “read,” but what it means is to talk out loud. That's interesting. So you would call that kara, what the Levite is doing, as we all sit here and listen, and we call it shama. Yeah? We listen. But let's say that you become so privileged.

I don't know. Maybe your uncle's the Levite or something like that. And he has handmade for you a section of the Torah on a little papyrus scroll for you to take home after you're there in Jerusalem, maybe for like Passover week or something. And so you go back home and you have this little portion of the Torah. Maybe it's like, I don't know, the story of the Exodus from slavery to Passover. And let’s say you want to start doing what we would call, in English, reading it.

Now, if you're not going to read it out loud to a group of people, then you're not doing kara, because that's a communal reading event.

But let's say you do want to do what we would call in English to read it. What would you call the thing that you want to do with that little scroll? What would you say in Hebrew?

That's the question. That's a little like mental experiment.

So I want to put out there that there actually is a word in the Hebrew Bible itself. And there is a word that was used in later Jewish culture and tradition for what individuals do with biblical texts.

The communal event is kara, but the personal engagement in Hebrew is called hagah.

And the verb is actually used twice in the Hebrew Bible at really important moments to describe the ideal reader of the collection of biblical scrolls that we call the Old Testament or the Hebrew Bible or what Jewish communities call the Tanakh.

Psalm 1, verses 1 and 2. How good is life for the man who does not walk in the counsel of the wicked nor stand in the way of sinners, nor does he sit in the assembly of mockers? Instead, in the instruction of Yahweh is his delight. Instruction is the word torah. And on his torah, he meditates day and night.

And that is very similar to what Moses, excuse me, what God says to Joshua through Moses, right, as the torch is being passed. And what God says to Joshua is be strong and courageous to observe diligently the whole torah that Moses, my servant, commanded you. Don't turn aside from it to the right or to the left so you can succeed wherever you go. The scroll of this torah will not depart from your mouth. You will meditate on it day and night and observe diligently everything written in it. Then you will succeed and then you will prosper. So this little word, “meditate,” is explicitly connected to scrolls and Torah. And it's talking about what an individual does in terms of their own habits. And so the Hebrew word here, I already said earlier, but it's here in the notes, is hagah. In our little time-travel experiment, if we left the temple and went due east from Jerusalem down through the hills of Judea, and then steeply down into the Jordan Valley near the Dead Sea, you would find up in the hills overlooking the Dead Sea this little commune of exiled priests. And they took their Bibles with them and their community literature with them. We call these the Dead Sea Scrolls. And they took a lot of biblical scrolls, which is super cool. But they also took a bunch of community literature that talks about who they are, why they exist, what they're all about. And multiple times in their literature, they describe what it means to be learned in the scriptures. Twice in one of their foundational documents, called the Damascus Document, they call it being educated in the scroll of hagi, which is the noun form of the verb hagah. So they actually call the Bible, or these scriptural texts, the scrolls of meditation— meditation scrolls. It's like a meta-word. It's a word found in the Bible, but it's also a meta-word because it's a word in the Bible about what you're supposed to do with the Bible. And it’s hagah: to meditate. Okay, so what’s cool is hagah is used a little over two dozen times in the Hebrew Bible. And if you survey the uses, I just want to show you some examples and have us build up a mental portrait of this activity. What are you supposed to be doing? Hagah is used to describe the quiet sounds that animals make.

So, in Isaiah 38, Hezekiah hagahs like a mourning dove.

Or you can hagah sadly like a dove. So think of the sound of a dove. I won't try and make it. I'll butcher it. But you know the sound. It sounds kind of sad.

It's really hard not to do it.

Also, when a lion has caught its prey—maybe it's in its mouth, where it has killed it, and it's right there, about to start eating it— the sound it makes, like the low growl of a lion, can be described as hagah.

Hagah is used of human speech, especially speech that is quiet because you’re trying to keep something secret. So people who are speaking threats will hagah treachery, or people who are going to cause trouble for someone hagah violence. So if you're going to surprise somebody with a trap or a plan, you're not going to say it out loud. You're going to say it like really, really quietly.

Hagah is a way of focusing on God. So the poet of Psalm 63 says about God, “I hagah about you through the night.” The poet of Psalm 77 says, “I will hagah on your works and ponder your mighty deeds.” Psalm 35 says, “My tongue will hagah your righteousness.” But then also in Psalm 37, you can hang out with somebody who does right by God and neighbors so consistently that anytime they speak, they just hagah wisdom.

That's interesting. It's apparently something an individual does with a scriptural text. It's a multisensory activity. Because if you do it with a scroll, you're obviously reading it. So you're taking in the letters on the scroll, but you're not doing it silently. You're doing it out loud, but quietly.

You're doing it regularly, day and night over the course of a lifetime. So I think what we're supposed to imagine is sitting with a biblical text, reading and saying it out loud, quietly to yourself, repetitively over the course of a lifetime.

So apparently this is what the biblical authors think you should do with the Bible. And it's what the ideal readers of biblical texts are described as doing. It's hagah. I think “meditate” is a fantastic word, but it’s not a word without problems, because meditation means a lot of things to a lot of people. Many people might associate meditation with emptying your mind of thoughts. And actually, that is a really important habit to build and a good thing to do. But that isn’t hagah. That’s not what hagah means. Hagah is about focusing your thoughts, not emptying them. It’s not about trying to have no thoughts, but focusing your thoughts so that you can think deeply about one thing.

That is, the words of Scripture. And you're doing it out loud. It's embodied. It's a way of reading with your body—reading with your vocal cords and saying it out loud. If you’ve ever had the experience of reading out loud versus reading silently, it is a different experience. There could be a way to read Psalm 1 and Joshua 1 and say, it's God's word to me. And that's a very pious thing to say.

So meditate on it day and night. Of course, focus your thoughts. It's about the wonders of God and God's wisdom. And, for sure, that’s part of it: what Scripture is about is worth focusing our thoughts on. I do want to offer what I think is another layer of meaning in hagah, which is not just what Scripture is about, but also if something requires a lifetime of daily reading out loud to oneself, is it possible that this also refers not just to what Scripture is about, but to how it communicates? In other words, it's a kind of literature that actually requires you to think hard about it for you to discover the layers and depths of meaning that are there.

And essentially, the rest of this course is going to be my argument for why I think that second meaning is also part of what hagah involves. Biblical authors took extreme care and developed a really wide toolset of literary techniques for how they wanted to say what they wanted to say. These tools are not native to how contemporary people, especially contemporary Westernized people, tend to read and process literature. I want to make an analogy that I think has been really helpful for me in helping make the familiar parts of the Bible unfamiliar again. In my own journey with the Bible over the last few decades, I didn’t read it growing up, so it was all brand new and startling in my early twenties. But after a few years, it becomes familiar. The reading toolset I’d like to share with you, which I’m referring to as meditation literature, has been transformative for me.

Because it’s very easy for Scripture over time to become something like an echo chamber, where you hear back what you expect to hear. And so part of developing a reading toolset for Scripture, to make sure you’re not just hearing your own ideas back at you, is learning to track with how the biblical authors think, which might be really different from how I think. And the way that they wrote might be really different than how I would think about writing something. And is it possible that it actually requires hagah? Not just because it's about God, but because it actually will take repetition to get accustomed to how the biblical authors are saying what they want to say. So can I put one more thing out there to show you? I want to read you a very strange poem. In France in the 1960s, a group of mathematicians, linguists, and literature professors got together. They were so bored with Western poetry and literature that they wanted to bend the categories of what was possible—of what counts as literature. And so they began to imagine a whole different toolset for how to write a poem and a story. And this poem that I'd like to read to you is kind of like the crown jewel of this movement. Oulipo is an acronym for the French phrase Ouvroir de littérature potentielle—the workshop of potential literature. And here‘s the flagship poem, called a “Liminal Poem”. O to see man’s stern poetic thought publicly expanding recklessly imaginative mathematical inventiveness, open-mindedness, unconditionally superfecundating, non-antagonistical, hyper-sophisticated, interdenominational interpenetrabilities.

And then what follows is a list of names descending to the initials of the group’s founding member, Raymond Queneau.

So I just read a string of words.

Did the meaning of the poem make itself obvious to you upon a first reading?

No.

No.

Yeah, me neither.

I've had to stare at this thing for quite a while, so I have that advantage. So let's just notice that visually it's laid out in a way that's obviously intentional.

And the visual presentation makes you notice that the poem consists of words that go from one letter to two, three, four—increasing by one letter until you hit the midpoint. And then the poem ends, and the list of names also descends in number of letters, down to the two-letter initials of the group’s founding member. The poem itself is one long—like, I would have gotten terrible grades from my grammar teacher if I had written a sentence like this in fourth grade. But the poem is about how they're so bored with how poetry is written, they call it man's stern poetic thought. And what they long to see is poetry that is reckless, imaginative, mathematical, inventive, open-minded, unconditional, superfecundating, which means infinitely fruitful, non-antagonistical, hypersophisticated, interdenominational, and interpenetrable. These are a group of linguists, philosophers, mathematicians, and literature professors. By the 1980s, Oulipo had been around for a few decades, and its members had produced hundreds of novels and many collections of poetry. But they used constraints and practices that sound bizarre to us. For example, Georges Perec wrote an entire novel that doesn’t have the letter E. So he chose a word-choice constraint: the words he chose could never have the letter E.

Raymond Queneau wrote a very short story about a guy getting on and off a bus 99 times, in a different literary style each time. Jean Lescure wrote a story where every noun chosen was replaced by whatever word is seventh after it in the dictionary. Imagine trying to write a story that way. My favorite is a poem Raymond Queneau wrote that consists of 10 stanzas of 10 lines, and he made it so that every line is interchangeable with every other line of the corresponding slot. You can actually swap them back and forth, and it’s still coherent. And so he called it a poem of 100 million poems because it's 10 to the 10th power of possible poems that could be generated out of the 100 lines of poetry that he wrote. So that's what potential literature means. But here’s what’s so interesting: here was a group of brilliant, brilliant people who had imaginations so expansive that they wanted to dream up a way of writing that no one had ever thought of before. Of course, they had to build on practices that already existed. They're using, you know, the languages that they write in, but they're doing something new with those pre-existing languages and grammars and also producing something that had never quite been before.

I think this is an excellent analogy for how to account for this collection of ancient Hebrew texts and for the Jewish literature produced after the Hebrew Bible that we call Second Temple literature. One subcollection of Jewish Second Temple literature is what followers of Jesus call the New Testament. It was written entirely by Jewish followers of Jesus who were steeped in this literary tradition. There is something so unique and remarkable about this collection of texts. I also happen to have a religious conviction about it: I think these are God’s words to his people, guided by God's Spirit through these authors, but also these authors were people who lived in a place and a time. I would love to understand more about how to hagah on these texts and hear in them the unique open-minded, unconditional, super-fecundating, non-antagonistical, hyper-sophisticated, interdenominational interpenetrability of ancient Hebrew literature. This was hard to read.

Notice how it communicates on many levels. It’s mathematical, visual, and aural, and you have to think about it and I had to read it many times. But then I actually began to discover layers of meaning in it that were not obvious on the first reading and I just want to put out there that I think biblical texts are written in such a way that they require hagah, not just because they're about the most beautiful, remarkable person we could imagine who has revealed himself to us, the Father, Son, and the Spirit. There's an infinity of time to meditate on the beauty and wonder of what Scripture is about, but there is also at least a human lifetime’s worth of material to hagah on in how the literature communicates itself. And so what I'd like to do in this class is just give what I’ve discovered as a basic toolset for how to hear these ancient Jewish authors the way that they expected their readers to hear them. And it requires a set of reading tools that I’ve been learning about. They are so helpful and have illuminated scriptural texts in the Old and New Testament that I didn't come across at first in my own journey of learning to read the Bible. But I did eventually come across these tools as I learned about ancient Jewish culture and they've been hugely illuminating and they are actually fairly intuitive and kind of simple.

And anybody can put them to work, even if you don't know a lick of ancient Greek or Hebrew, even in translation. And so that’s what the rest of this course is going to be about: how to hagah on these texts and hopefully hear a voice that’s not our own, which is ultimately— at least, that’s my goal when I’m engaging Scripture. Okay, I just threw a whole bunch out there on the table. Let's take some time to process. I'd love to hear your reflections

or questions.Something that I found really interesting connects to a theory I call the blue-car theory. If you ask five people in a room to think of a blue car, they're each going to think of a different kind of blue and a different kind of car.But the words were the same; they were communicated. And so even this idea of speaking the word out loud and meditating on it, the words themselves carry meaning, but the tone that you say them in also carries an extra layer. So I’m really excited. I think even in my own personal study of the scriptures, how certain scriptures that I've memorized or recited or read inwardly several times take on a new life and breath, depending on the season of life I'm in or even how I read it that day. So yeah, I'm really excited to explore this further.

I appreciate that. There is inherently a subjective, personal element in any act of communication. And depending on the church community or Christian tradition you were brought up in, there may be a value placed on the personal element. What does the scriptural passage say to me? Maybe you’re from a tradition where there’s a high value placed on what the original author meant. And there’s one main meaning I’m supposed to get, and it’s the meaning the author had. And those are kind of like extremes. What does it mean to me? What did it mean for Paul the Apostle? And then there’s the in-between, which is to say that every act of hearing another speak, I have to filter it through me. I’m not Paul the Apostle; I’m me, and you’re you. So there'll always be that subjective filtering. And so maybe more of the goal is not to try and leave behind subjectivity, but to say there is someone other than myself that I want to hear.

But I also want what I hear to address the whole of who I am. And that moment is dynamic. Even the you that might read a passage of scripture a year ago is different than the you sitting here right now. Absolutely. And so hagah is such a great word for it because it speaks to the moment of reciting it to yourself, as opposed to just reading an object of communication and uploading it into my brain. It’s a much more embodied, objective, and subjective way of engaging scripture. So thank you for bringing that up. That's a really, really good observation.

I was just thinking: growing up in the evangelical church in the U.S., there was very little focus on some of the questions that you're getting at. I think maybe because we’re scared of asking questions. And the “how” was just not something—like, I’ve been around the Bible my whole life, and very little of that time was focused on the “how.” And what a beautiful invitation—an invitation that’s okay to receive.

Yeah, I was thinking about how, as you were sharing, even reading Scripture and hagah feel like such a relational invitation from God. As you were talking about how to hear a voice that’s not your own, I realized that I at least forget that God’s giving me an invitation to meditate with his Spirit. And so I try to remember, when I’m reading Scripture, to pray, “Holy Spirit, what do you want to illuminate for me in this?” As I’m chewing on this, like a lion with its prey, take me out of it— yes to subjective filtering—and also, “Holy Spirit, what do you want to speak to me?” Because I’m doing it in relationship with you. Yeah. And that’s just convicting because I don’t always make that space.

Yeah, both of those comments give me a good opportunity to bring clarity. So when we're engaging scripture, this element of hearing a voice other than my own speak to me, I mean, that happens in so many ways. Like in a conversation with somebody, they don’t know—they say something, and based on the day, the year, or the life that I’ve been having, you hear it in a certain way that they maybe didn’t have in mind. And so that’s a reality of communication. And that happens with scripture all of the time. There's another step that comes from attending to the “how.” The reason for bringing up the Oulipo group is to say, here's a group that made up a new how, a new how to communicate. And if you didn't have the handbook written by Warren Motte to tell you about the group and how they did what they did and why, what some of the tools they used were, then if all you picked up was a number of these poem collections or novels, it would be really difficult to make sense of what on earth is going on.

So thank you, Warren Motte. But what we don't have for the Bible is an ancient handbook written by a biblical author saying, “Hey, here’s our how. Here’s how we do what we do.” And if you knew that, then you could probably understand us better. We don't have that.

So there’s a whole field in biblical scholarship that is really about recovering the “how” inductively. And that process has a specific, kind of nerdy term: it’s called a poetics of biblical literature, or a poetics of literature. Not “poetic” in the sense that it’s like poetry; “poetics” comes from the Greek term poiesis, which means craftsmanship— the style of how you make a thing. And of course, literature is a kind of text that communicates both in terms of its content, what it's about, but also in terms of its form, how it is shaped. The form itself is part of its meaning. Recovering that form is essential because we don’t have a handbook for how biblical scribes operated. We have to inductively recover it by reading the literature itself. So in a way, you can learn how to recover a poetics of biblical literature by reading biblical literature. In fact, there’s no better way to do that than to hagah. So the interpersonal element of what the author of Psalms 1 and 2—which is what we’re going to focus on in the sessions ahead— had in mind matters. That author meant to communicate some things, and I want to know what those things are because I stand to benefit from that in many ways. But also there will be elements—things the author could never have known about, but that the divine guide of these authors, the Holy Spirit, definitely knows about as I’m interacting with this text.

And what I have found is that this second interaction between me and the Spirit through these texts has become infinitely more enriched, not replaced, but enriched, as I've learned to track more with the toolset and recover biblical poetics. So think of this as an invitation to go another step deeper, to engage these texts at another level. It’s not about a right method or a wrong method. It’s about this: here’s something that I think can help somebody deepen their relationship to how to meditate on Scripture. It may be helpful for you in this season of your life. It may not, but I’ll offer it nonetheless because I’ve found it infinitely helpful. Here’s some language we often use in BibleProject resources for what we want to do. I want to gain a native competence in how to read ancient Jewish literature—that is, biblical literature. What is it that Jesus would have known about how to read and engage the Isaiah scroll that he grew up with because it was in his environment, so he never had to take a class on it? I would love to learn how to read the Bible on its own terms. I would love to recover a way of engaging Scripture— I’ll use some metaphors—that is in sync with its design and goes along the grain of its composition. And perhaps, really, if I’m honest, the heart behind it for me is that I want to read these texts the way that Jesus and the apostles read them and have the kind of experience that they did. They obviously felt these texts were words of life that revealed a God of infinite beauty and love. And I would love to deepen my toolset for how to do that. So that's what we're going to do in the sessions. We're going to spend the majority of this class working slowly through Psalms 1 and 2, observing how these poems are written so that we can hear even more clearly what they are about. But before we do that, I want to do one more session on three more theoretical ideas concerning the how that have been so helpful for me to learn how to recover a way of reading literature that is not from my culture and time. So three ideas, and then we're going to dive into Psalm 1 and 2. How are you doing? You ready? Ready for action? Okay, so let's pause before we do that. Take a brain rest before we look at three foundational ideas for recovering a poetics of biblical literature.

